# Higgs Boson Event Detection #

The LHC collides bunches of protons every 50 nanoseconds within each of its four experiments, each crossing producing a random number of proton-proton collisions (with a Poisson expectation between 10 and 35, depending on the LHC parameters) called events8. Two colliding protons produce a small firework in which part of the kinetic energy of the protons is converted into new particles. Most of the resulting particles are very unstable and decay quickly into a cascade of lighter particles.

Based on these properties, the properties of the decayed parent particle are inferred, and the inference chain is continued until reaching the heaviest primary particles. given the elusive nature of neutrinos, their minuscule mass, and the way they oscillate between flavors, one could very well imagine that the mass of leptons comes from an entirely different mechanism. Hence the importance of measuring as precisely as possible the coupling of the Higgs to tau arises.

Particle colliders enable us to probe the fundamental nature of matter by observing exotic particles produced by high-energy collisions. Because the experimental measurements from these collisions are necessarily incomplete and imprecise, machine learning algorithms play a major role in the analysis of experimental data. The high-energy physics community typically relies on standardized machine learning software packages for this analysis and devotes substantial effort towards improving statistical power by hand-crafting high-level features derived from the raw collider measurements.

With the given dataset, **we have to classify whether the given event was a signal or a background noise in the process of decay for Higgs particle acceleration.**

Metric - **Precision**

Data Source: https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/higgs-boson/data

The simulator. The dataset has been built from official ATLAS full-detector simulation. The simulator has two parts. In the first, random proton-proton collisions are simulated based on the knowledge that we have accumulated on particle physics. It reproduces the random microscopic explosions resulting from the proton-proton collisions. In the second part, the resulting particles are tracked through a virtual model of the detector. The process yields simulated events with properties that mimic the statistical properties of the real events with additional information on what has happened during the collision, before particles are measured in the detector.

Signal sample and background sample. The signal sample contains events in which Higgs bosons (with a fixed mass of 125 GeV) were produced. The background sample was generated by other known processes that can produce events with at least one electron or muon and a hadronic tau, mimicking the signal. Only three background processes were retained for the dataset. The first comes from the decay of the 𝑍
boson (with a mass of 91.2 GeV) into two taus. This decay produces events with a topology very similar to that produced by the decay of a Higgs. The second set contains events with a pair of top quarks, which can have a lepton and a hadronic tau among their decay. The third set involves the decay of the 𝑊

boson, where one electron or muon and a hadronic tau can appear simultaneously only through imperfections of the particle identification procedure.

Training set and test set. The training set and the test set respectively contains 250000
and 550000 observations. The two sets share 31 common features between them. Additionally, the training set contains labels (signal or background) and weights.

